so today's video it's gonna be a little
bit different than what I know really do
the video I'm responding to here is
unusual because it openly declares
itself to be a philosophy a
philosophical argument essentially like
my diet philosophy and specifically why
I will not go vegan the woman recording
the video says to the camera directly
this is her philosophy of why she eats
meat her philosophy of why she is not
vegan her philosophy of diet of
nutrition and of life in general she
explains to you that from her
perspective life is short and from her
perspective
life is about nothing more than your
enjoyment of it
my overall diet philosophy in a nutshell
is pretty much enjoying my life because
I never know when it's actually going to
end and treating my body in a way that
is not going to definitively short in my
life through poor dietary habits a bonus
Yin for me as a vegan it's easy to be
self-righteous
you say shut it all down natural
settle the animals free that's easy put
the whole reason why my youtube channel
exists is that I'm not really interested
these the answers to complicated
question I'm addressed until all the
murky complicated
you know moral gray areas
she seeks in her life a balance between
what is healthy and what is enjoyable so
she is declaring her life is not about
achieving and sustaining optimal
nutrition
I think implicitly she is also telling
you that her life is not about achieving
and sustaining optimal morality there's
a considerable distraction here and I'll
say why she offers this distraction
there's a considerable distraction in
that she offers a very unfill Asafa chol
argument the veganism while it works for
some does not work for everybody and I
think it's really quite shameful for her
because she is a woman of science shall
we say she's a woman with this formal
education in Dietetics and nutrition she
ought to be able to argue that in a
scientific manner or clarify exactly
what her claim is what does it mean for
you to say that not everybody can be
vegan I'll come back to that there are
some some very rare anecdotes there are
people who have really extraordinary
health problems that mean they can't be
vegan but to say so vaguely in such a
pseudo-scientific way if I may use the
term to say so vaguely the veganism just
isn't gonna work for everybody
she muddies the water with this argument
and it's an argument that's not
connected to philosophy I think she
spent so much time on this fundamentally
irrelevant point about veganism not
working for everybody because she feels
uncomfortable herself with the
implications of defending the eating of
meat as something that is unhealthy and
unnecessary we're all really accustomed
to hearing the eating of meat justified
as a necessary evil but she's actually
starting her argument off on the footing
that she knows it's unnecessary she
knows it's unhealthy but that she is
going to accept it in her life anyway as
a form of pleasure and it's a form of
pleasure that she knows causes harm
harm to the environment harm in a very
real sense to our society but most
obviously indirectly harm to animals
harm and suffering to animals one point
that I've made before in one of my last
400 videos on this channel I don't
remember which is that actually very
very few people do live their lives as
if the meaning of life were pleasure
were just enjoyment and when you look at
extreme examples like the use of cocaine
I think you see very clearly how what
she claims she lives by is a principle
that very very few people really believe
or could really live with why do you
refuse to use cocaine maybe you have an
answer off the top of your head like you
had a friend in high school who used
cocaine and it destroyed his life you
had a terrible experience maybe you have
some scientific anecdotes about the
damage that cocaine does to your brain
or what have you but hey as she says
life is short
life is short I'm not talking about the
difference between occasional cocaine
use and becoming an addict I'm talking
about why would you choose to live your
life with absolutely zero use of cocaine
if you really think about it for
yourself and others I think that
millions and millions of people a very
large percentage of people they make
that decision not just to refuse cocaine
today at tomorrow
not just to refuse it this weekend but
to never use it because they value the
feeling that they are a good person
it may be very vague as a moral concept
but the sense that being a good person
is more important than using cocaine
this weekend or once a month or once a
year is actually something that guides
the decisions human beings make in a
very powerful and pervasive way now if
you ask me do I really believe that
using cocaine makes you a bad person I
can ask you in return if you have a
daughter and your daughter has a new
boyfriend and you know that he uses
cocaine sometimes
not that he's an addict maybe it's once
a month maybe it's a couple times a year
you tell me do you regard him as a good
person
whether it's your co-worker your
daughter's new boyfriend or anyone else
moral judgment is real let's not pretend
that we don't make moral judgments when
we're in the middle of evaluating an
ethical argument which is what this is
I'm trying to enjoy my life I thought my
point in making this allegory with
cocaine was completely obvious but
apparently nobody else did so I'm adding
in this clarification here guys on take
two so to speak look it's very easy
philosophically for someone to claim
that they live just for pleasure or in
this woman's case she only is seeking
out a balance of pleasure and not
damaging her health so badly then it's
gonna shorten her life it's easy to say
oh really it's hard to live by I'm
actually very skeptical when someone
makes a claim like this that they just
lived for today and not for tomorrow
they just live for pleasure and for
nothing else in fact when you sit down
and talk to people when you get to know
people what you discover is the real
range of action that they engage in
their real range of sensual indulgence
--is is incredibly limited and it's
limited above all else by their own ego
by their own sense of what it is to be a
good person if this woman really was
living a life in the reckless pursuit of
sensual pleasure with the only limit
being that she didn't want to die young
that being the only constraint then I
don't think her life would be anything
like what we see on YouTube on the
contrary this idea that life is short
that you gotta recklessly pursue your
pleasures it's just being invoked here
as an excuse for eating meat but in fact
it would be a much better excuse for the
use of cocaine or what have you and we
see she's not doing that and most of us
whatever our explicitly stated reasons
are we're not using cocaine because of
some sense of what it means to be a good
person and vegans differ from reduce at
Aryans vegans are different from people
who are merely trying to cut back on me
who try to eat less for the sake of
their health because they try to
eliminate it absolutely and if that's
hard to relate to you should probably
consider that the majority of people
don't just cut back on cocaine they want
to eliminate it absolutely because they
feel that if they just dabbled in it if
they just used it once in a while or
even just once a month that would have
an impact on how they think about
themselves how they feel about
themselves the answer they have to give
when they look in the mirror and ask am
i a good person life is short
one of my few original ideas in life
honestly I haven't had that many one of
my few was at the end of my time in
university the first time around
University of Toronto I'd read a lot of
moral philosophy I read a lot of ethics
philosophy in the Western tradition and
Asian traditions or what have you
and you know I came to the conclusion
that the basic concept of ethics itself
relies on the assumption that there's a
meaningful connection between what we
know and how we feel it's very hard to
enjoy something when you know it is
doing harm to another person it's very
hard to enjoy something if you know that
it causes an animal suffering and you
have to watch that animal suffering
while you enjoy it now the awareness of
an animal suffering of maybe just today
I went to the market to buy fruit and
vegetables and I saw a fish suffocating
to death on the market floor writhing
leaping up and down in agony I don't eat
fish I'm a vegan it doesn't impact me in
that way but it still makes it hard for
me to enjoy buying vegetables I think if
you sit at the dinner table and actually
watch a cow having its throat cut you
watch a pig being killed in front of you
while you're eating bacon I think it's
very very hard on a visceral level for
people to enjoy that food if they don't
disassociate the experience
from the harm that they're doing and
this applies to many many things in life
I don't want to get any examples that
Archie Rose probably as a child probably
as a young person you had the experience
of really enjoying something and only
finding out later that it broke somebody
else's heart that somehow it hurts
somebody whether in a purely emotional
sense it made somebody else jealous it
made your parents worried
that it caused some kind of concern or
harm that maybe impalpable or if you
really did something I remember I knew
some boys and they stole a bunch of they
stole a bunch of thermometers from a
science lab and smashed them up over a
grade and because they wanted to play
with the ether mercury and I remember
for me when I found out this story I was
just horrified don't you know mercury is
toxic don't you know you're dumping
mercury into the river because gonna go
down the storm grate and don't you know
you're destroying a laboratory um you
know the basic premise of morality
itself or that we can speak in a
systematic way about ethics tends to
rely on the assumption that how you feel
about something is gonna change based on
what should know about it and I think
that many of you even if you're a
meat-eater if you were eating something
like a hot dog and then you found out it
was made of a dog an actual dog or you
found it was made with human meat that
you were engaged in cannibalism it might
knowing that wouldn't change the taste
but it might really change how you feel
it might change your enjoyment of what
it is you're eating in a sudden and
unexpected way what I know changes how I
feel many many of the criminals who
engage in petty crimes
for example stealing a purse they
actually feel that when they are put in
prison that they themselves are the
victim of a crime many of them go to
prison and feel that they did something
trivial
they stole someone's purse and yet here
they are going to prison for two years
and they'll have other narratives in
their mind they have a friend and he
only went to prison for a few months but
he did something much more serious or
they read a story in the newspaper but
celebrity who got away with a crime so
it's very easy for them to construct in
their own minds a narrative that their
own crime was trivial nobody was really
harmed and that they as the criminal are
in fact the victim and then very often
they're shocked when they sit down and
watch a video and they for the first
time understand that for the person who
had their purse stolen it wasn't just
the loss of a purse it had all these
other impacts in their life and that
they personally lived with fear that
then whenever they walk down the same
street where they were robbed before
they were looking around the way they
felt and the impact on their lives
very often the criminal only then
suddenly realizes the harm and they feel
very differently about their own crime
and their own situation in that prison
what they know changes how they feel and
when you look at a more extreme crime
like rape the vast majority of people
are not rapists a minority are the vast
majority of people cannot enjoy sex if
they're aware that they're harming
somebody at the time and when we talk
about malicious rape rape that's carried
out sadistically knowing that the other
person is experiencing fear and misery
and so on it's in a very different
category from a sort of drunken date
rape and what-have-you situations where
the perpetrator is not even aware that
he's harming the person and may only
found out find out later that harm has
been done knowing that you're doing harm
maybe it's just harm to the particular
Pig to the particular cow
maybe it's harm to the environment to
ecology when you scale it up looking at
both the water that's wasted in
producing meat and the water that's be
fouled the water that's polluted by
unimaginable millions of tons of poo
from pigs cows and what-have-you flowing
downstream
when you know that you're doing harm and
you know that that harm is unnecessary
can you really enjoy eating meat the
same way can you really enjoy making
love to someone if you know that you're
causing them harm if you know that
you're causing them fear if you know
that it's something they're gonna suffer
reflecting on or remembering later I
think the truth is some people can and
some people can't
and most people simply make a choice
they can swing either way life is short
I'm trying to enjoy my life enjoying my
life because I never know what is
actually going to end for the other side
I don't know if even a single meat eater
is gonna watch this video almost all my
audience is already vegan if you won't
understand it from our perspective
please do think for a minute about how
you would feel if you were living in a
society where some people some are
cannibals I'm not so far removed from
that situation myself we do have some
ethnic groups in northern Myanmar who
continued to engage in cannibalism right
through the 20th century and I have read
accounts of that from people who lived
amongst those ethnic groups and some of
those ethnic groups are living right
here where I am I live in de Hong right
on the border between China and northern
Myanmar we have another ethnic group
here who are quite quite easy to find
quite populous here in the town where
I'm living who were famous as
headhunters specifically for
decapitating people and putting lines of
skulls lines of human heads on the the
path leading up to their villages and
their villages were always set up as a
fortress so you would have to walk up a
path with decapitated heads on both
sides of you before you approach the the
wooden gate to enter one of their towns
now obviously in the last few decades
that's disappeared but I remember I read
one count from the 1980s and 1990s
of still some of those tribal groups
engaging in cannibalism you know if you
live around other people who are
cannibals they will have in a meaningful
sense an appeal to tradition to justify
their behavior a lot of people including
vegan gains you say oh this is an appeal
to tradition fallacy well they may
really feel that it is very very
meaningful for them to continue the
traditions of their ancestors that
involved killing and eating human beings
but it's also something where they
recognize it as wrong they have to
recognize themselves as being implicated
in a crime and all their ancestors going
back a thousand years as having done
something as having done something that
was both evil and unnecessary but if you
ask me do I feel morally superior to
someone who eats meat when I live in a
society where we all have to share the
same plates well how would you feel if
you were living in a city where some of
the people around you some engaged in
cannibalism and where some of them told
you this is how my ancestors lived this
is very important to me in my culture
and has been for thousands of years and
you know what hey 23 hours a day or 28
days of the month they live like a
normal person they live like you and me
why would you hesitate to say no there's
an important ethical difference between
you and me even if we're co-workers even
if we're friends even we get along on so
many other issues there's an important
ethical difference because I'm willing
to recognize that what you do when you
kill and eat another human being isn't
just evil it's an unnecessary evil and
the fact that you may enjoy it the fact
that it may be pleasant the fact that
your ancestors did it the fact that it's
deeply meaningful to your religion or
your cultural tradition that's not good
enough that's not good enough for me
and for that same reason I don't accept
that life is about pleasure I don't
accept the basic premise of this woman's
philosophy so it's not surprising that I
disagree with her about everything else
I also don't think that we need to live
our lives in pursuit of optimal morality
we don't have to run around volunteering
to help injured people in every war in
every refugee crisis every time you see
a beggar on the street you don't have to
try to help but I do think there's a
minimum standard of doing the best you
can and when you know that something in
your own life is not merely evil but an
unnecessary evil there is an obligation
on all of us to eliminate
[Music]